Title: Accidental illusion
Date: 2017-12-14 
Tags: illusions

**NOTE**: You can see a webapp I put together to investigate this in
more detail [here](https://www.wfbroderick.com/illusory-grating) (note
that it takes a while to load)

While creating two-dimensional sinusoidal gratings and investigating
their local properties, I accidentally created an illusion today, which
I find pretty strong (though the strength of it does depend on its size
and your distance to it).

I created the grating shown below:

![]({static}/images/grating-regular.png)

and was dropping down some circular windows on it to see if I could
recreate the same image by making a bunch of small sinusoids and
combining them. What I ended up seeing was:

![]({static}/images/grating-illusion.png)

To me, it looks like there's an illusory grating that's perpendicular to
the actual one, but if you focus on the location of those supposed
stripes, putting them in the center of your gaze, they disappear. This
is pretty strong to me, even overwhelming the original grating unless I
focus directly on it. It changes with size / distance though, so that if
I make it really small or stand far away, it looks more cross-hatched, a
combination of the two patterns, than either one alone.

I'm not entirely sure why this is happening (and, discussing it with the
lab, neither is anyone else). It seems similar to the following classic
illusion, where the Xs in either side of the image look like their
yellow / blue, respectively, but are actually the same color.

![]({static}/images/color-x-illusion.jpg)

A similar illusion is shown below, where the two squares are the same
grayscale level, but appear to be different.

![]({static}/images/brightness-illusion.png)

In all of these, the illusion relies on the fact that our perception of
brightness and color of an object is influenced by the contrast with the
stuff around that object and not just the object itself. This relates to
a recurring theme in vision and perception more generally: we are not
just passively perceiving a perfect copy of the world, our sensory
systems perform computation on our input, which highlights some pieces
of information and throws away other pieces. This happens so fast and
automatically that we often don't realize it's happening until we see
illusions like the above, which make it obvious.
