Title: About
Date: 2017-08-23
Summary: About me

I am an associate data scientist at the [Flatiron
Institute](https://www.simonsfoundation.org/flatiron/) [Center for
Computational Neuroscience (CCN)](https://www.simonsfoundation.org/flatiron/center-for-computational-neuroscience/), working to make computational
neuroscience more open, cumulative, and reproducible. I work on open
source software packages, help the researchers at CCN share their code
and data so that others can use it, and write tutorials and
documentation to this end. You can read more at the
[NeuroRSE](https://neurorse.flatironinstitute.org/) group page, and check out [Software]({filename}software.md) for some details on the software projects I work on.

Previously, I was a PhD student at New York University's Center for
Neural Science, where I researched the processing of visual information
with Eero Simoncelli and Jon Winawer. I used computational models and
functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate how the early
visual cortex processes and represents visual information. Beyond my
main research, I was involved with the [Scientist Action and Advocacy
Network](http://scaan.net/) since it's founding.

This blog is a way for me to practice writing about and explaining my
research in various levels of detail, because science is complicated,
writing about things help me understand them better, and practice is
always helpful. I'll also write about neuroscience more broadly, as well
as statistics, python, open science, and other science-related topics.

Before starting my PhD, I worked with Scott Huettel and Guillermo Sapiro
at Duke University as a research assistant. While there, I used
multi-variate pattern analysis of fMRI to investigate the neural
correlates of social decision making. We used machine learning decoding
methods to identify locations in the brain that could be used to predict
whether someone was playing against a human or a computer, and what kind
of strategy they were using. I also worked with Wang Suiping at South
China Normal University in Guangzhou, China as a [Luce
Scholar](http://www.hluce.org/lsprogram.aspx), using graph theoretical
analyses to understand differences in network properties of brain
functional networks during reading in English and Chinese for
bilinguals. As an undergraduate, I worked with Pat Simen at Oberlin
College on a model of human behavioral performance in a two-alternative
forced choice task.

This blog is made with [pelican](https://blog.getpelican.com/) using a
slightly modified version of Alexandre Vicenzi's
[Flex](https://github.com/alexandrevicenzi/Flex) theme.

A pdf of my CV can be found [here](../docs/CV.pdf), but it's most likely
not up-to-date.
